extends: default.liquid

title:      A Little Story About the `yes` Unix Command
date:       10 Oct 2017 00:00:00 +0000
humandate:  10th of October 2017
path:       2017/yes
---

What's the simplest Unix command you know?
There's `echo`, which prints a string to stdout and `true`, which always terminates with an exit code of 0.

Among the rows of simple Unix commands, there's also `yes`.
If you run it without arguments, you get an infinite stream of y's, separated by a newline:

```
y
y
y
y
(...you get the idea)
```

What seems to be pointless in the beginning turns out to be pretty helpful  :

```
yes | sh boring_installation.sh
```

Ever installed a program, which required you to type "y" and hit enter to keep going?
`yes` to the rescue! It will carefully fulfill this duty, so you can keep watching [Pootie Tang](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yhBExhldRXQ).


### Writing yes

Here's a basic version in... BASIC.

```basic
PRINT "y"
GOTO 10
```

And here's the same thing in Python:

```python
while True:
    print("y")
```

Simple, eh? Not so quick!  
Turns out, that program is quite slow. 

```
python yes.py | pv -r > /dev/null
[4.17MiB/s]
```

Compare that with the built-in version on my Mac:

```
yes | pv > /dev/null
[34.2MiB/s]
```

So I tried to write a quicker version in Rust. Here's my first attempt:

```rust
use std::env;

fn main() {
    let expletive = env::args().nth(1).unwrap_or("y".into());
    loop {
        println!("{}", expletive);
    }
}
```

Some explanations:

* The string we want to print in a loop is the first command line parameter and is named *expletive*. I learned this word from the `yes` manpage.
* I use `unwrap_or` to get the *expletive* from the parameters. In case the parameter is not set, we use "y" as a default.
* The default parameter gets converted from a string slice (`&str`) into an *owned* string on the heap (`String`) using `into()`.


Let's test it.

```
cargo run --release | pv -r > /dev/null
   Compiling yes v0.1.0
    Finished release [optimized] target(s) in 1.0 secs
     Running `target/release/yes`
[2.35MiB/s] 
```

Whoops, that doesn't look any better. It's even slower than the Python version!
That caught my attention, so I looked around for the source code of a C implementation.

Here's the [very first version of the program](https://github.com/dspinellis/unix-history-repo/blob/4c37048d6dd7b8f65481c8c86ef8cede2e782bb3/usr/src/cmd/yes.c), released with Version 7 Unix and famously authored by Ken Thompson on <nobr>Jan 10, 1979</nobr>:

```c
main(argc, argv)
char **argv;
{
	for (;;)
		printf("%s\n", argc>1? argv[1]: "y");
}
```

No magic here.

Compare that to the [GNU coreutils version, which is mirrored on Github](https://github.com/coreutils/coreutils/blame/master/src/yes.c). After 25 years, *it is still under active development!*
The last code change was around a [year ago](https://github.com/coreutils/coreutils/commit/4cdb1703aff044de44d27e0558714542197f6dad).

The important part is at the end:

```c
/* Repeatedly output the buffer until there is a write error; then fail.  */
while (full_write (STDOUT_FILENO, buf, bufused) == bufused)
    continue;
```

Aha! So they simply use a buffer to make write operations faster.
The buffer size is defined by a constant named `BUFSIZ`, which gets chosen on each system so as to make I/O efficient (see [here](https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Controlling-Buffering.html)).
On my system, that was defined as 1024 bytes. I actually had better performance with 8192 bytes.

I've extended my Rust program:

```rust
use std::io::{self, Write};

const BUFSIZE: usize = 8192;

fn main() {
  let expletive = env::args().nth(1).unwrap_or("y".into());
  let mut writer = BufWriter::with_capacity(BUFSIZE, io::stdout());
  loop {
    writeln!(writer, "{}", expletive).unwrap();
  }
}
```

The important part is, that the buffer size is a multiple of four, to ensure [memory alignment](https://stackoverflow.com/a/381368/270334).

Running that gave me 51.3MiB/s.
Faster than the version, which comes with my system, but still way slower than the results from [this Reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/unix/comments/6gxduc/how_is_gnu_yes_so_fast/) that I found, where the author talks about 10.2GiB/s.

### Lessons learned

The trivial program `yes` turns out not to be so trivial after all.
It uses output buffering and memory alignment to improve performance.
Re-implementing Unix tools is fun and makes me appreciate the nifty tricks,
which make our computers fast.
