blog/2018-go-io-testing.md, before:

extends: default.liquid

title:      "Refactoring Go Code to Avoid File I/O in Unit Tests"
subtitle:   Without Mocking or Temporary Files
date:       22 Mar 2018 00:00:00 +0000
humandate:  22nd of March 2018
path:       2018/go-io-testing
social_img: 2018-go-io-testing.png
---

At work today, I refactored some simple Go code to make it more testable.
The idea was to avoid file handling in unit tests without mocking or using temporary files by separating data input/output and data manipulation.

<figure>
	<div class="loader">
            <object data="/img/posts/2018/go-io-testing/gopher.svg">A gopher reading a long computer printout</object>
            <img class="frozen" src="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAA8AAAAFCAMAAACtk0YeAAAAb1BMVEW/476+47294ry90LrDu7u6wLS947y94r3Q3c/K28rPy8rd1NrVv8m017O84bvC4MHKxsbFs7vVyNC62ri63rm737q537jg39/Qz83s7Oy83rvA5L+94b3H2sbG2sbN28zC2cHJ28i9ybi40LLA5MB2FprZAAAANElEQVR42jXHtQGAQABFsfdxX4D9t6PC3U7SRYiPkHTCI8V/rY3Dnsx88G9kdN9bkLNC/gJaSwktEGNpZwAAAABJRU5ErkJggg" />
        </div> 
  <figcaption>Illustration by <a href="https://github.com/marcusolsson/gophers/">Marcus Olsson</a> (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)</figcaption>

</figure>

I was surprised that I couldn't find a simple explanation on sites like StackOverflow,
which is why I wrote down some notes myself so that others can refer to it in the future.

### Our example code

The initial version looked like this:

```go
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"io/ioutil"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	analyze("test.txt")
}

func analyze(file string) error {
	handle, err := os.Open(file)

	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	defer handle.Close()

	scanner := bufio.NewScanner(handle)
	for scanner.Scan() {
		// Do something with line
		_ = scanner.Text()
	}
	return nil
}
```

As you can see, we take a filename as input, and we open that file inside the `analyze` function to do something with its contents.

### Writing our first test for the code

A typical test harness for that code might look like this:

```go
package main

import "testing"

func Test_analyze(t *testing.T) {
	t.Run("Test something", func(t *testing.T) {
		if err := analyze("test.txt"); (err != nil) != false {
			t.Errorf("analyze() error = %v", err)
		}
	})
}
```

All fine and good?  

### Problems

This will work, but file I/O while running tests is not always the best idea.
For one, you could be running in a constrained environment, where you don't have access to the file.
We could use [temporary files](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20924657/270334) to avoid this.

But there might be problems with disk I/O, which makes for flaky tests and frustration.  
Another process could also modify the file during the test.
All these issues have nothing to do with your code.

Furthermore, it's not enough to just look at the test and see exactly what's going on. You also have to read the text file first.

A lot of people [suggest mocking](https://stackoverflow.com/a/37035375/270334) instead. 
There are quite a few powerful libraries like [spf13/afero](https://github.com/spf13/afero) for this purpose.
These packages will create temporary files in the background and clean up afterward.

In my opinion, mocking should be the last resort when it comes to testing. Before you mock, check that you use the right abstractions in your code.
Maybe implementing against an interface or using Dependency Injection helps decouple components?
More often than not, a clear separation of concerns is all you need.

### Refactoring to make testing easier

In my case above, we can easily avoid using mocks and temporary files by decoupling file I/O from the analysis.
We do so by refactoring our `analyze` function to call `doSomething`, which takes an [`io.Reader`](https://golang.org/pkg/io/#Reader).
(You could also use an array of strings for now.)

Our `main.go` now looks like this:

```go
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"io"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	analyze("test.txt")
}

func analyze(file string) error {
	handle, err := os.Open(file)

	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	defer handle.Close()
	return doSomething(handle)
}

func doSomething(handle io.Reader) error {
	scanner := bufio.NewScanner(handle)
	for scanner.Scan() {
		// Do something with line
		_ = scanner.Text()
	}
	return nil
}
```

Now we can test the actual analysis in isolation:

```go
package main

import (
	"strings"
	"testing"
)

func Test_analyze(t *testing.T) {
	t.Run("Test something", func(t *testing.T) {
		if err := doSomething(strings.NewReader("This is a test string")); (err != nil) != false {
			t.Errorf("analyze() error = %v", err)
		}
	})
}
```

We changed `analyze("test.txt")` to `doSomething(strings.NewReader("This is a test string"))`.
(Of course, we should also write a separate test for `analyze()`, but the focus is on decoupling the datasource-agnostic part here.)

### Result

By slightly refactoring our code, we gained the following advantages:

* *Simple testability*: No mocks or temporary files.
* *Separation of concerns*: Each function does exactly one thing.
* *Easier code re-use*: The `doSomething()` function will work with any `io.Reader` and can be called from other places. We can even move it to its own library if we want.

On Reddit, user [soapysops](https://www.reddit.com/user/soapysops) made an [important remark](https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/86f4gw/refactoring_go_code_to_avoid_file_io_in_unit_tests/dw4l2bq/):  
> In general, I prefer to not accept a file name in an API. A file name doesn't give users enough control. It doesn't let you use an unusual encoding, special file permissions, or a bytes.Buffer instead of an actual file, for example. Accepting a file name adds a huge dependency to the code: the file system, along with all of its associated OS specific stuff.
>
> So I probably would have eliminated the file name based API and only exposed one based on io.Reader. That way, you have complete code coverage, fast tests, and far fewer edge cases to worry about.

I totally agree with that sentiment.  

The refactoring above is just the first step towards better architecture. There is definitely a lot more you can do.

Also, often times you can't simply change the user-facing API easily, because the API might be public and might already have users. In these cases, small, incremental steps are a step in the right direction.

Commit message:

Add comments and extend article a bit

blog/2018-go-io-testing.md, after:

extends: default.liquid

title:      "Refactoring Go Code to Avoid File I/O in Unit Tests"
subtitle:   Without Mocking or Temporary Files
date:       22 Mar 2018 00:00:00 +0000
humandate:  22nd of March 2018
path:       2018/go-io-testing
social_img: 2018-go-io-testing.png
comments:
   - <a href="https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/86f4gw/refactoring_go_code_to_avoid_file_io_in_unit_tests/">Reddit</a>
---

At work today, I refactored some simple Go code to make it more testable.
The idea was to avoid file handling in unit tests without mocking or using temporary files by separating data input/output and data manipulation.

<figure>
	<div class="loader">
            <object data="/img/posts/2018/go-io-testing/gopher.svg">A gopher reading a long computer printout</object>
            <img class="frozen" src="data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAAA8AAAAFCAMAAACtk0YeAAAAb1BMVEW/476+47294ry90LrDu7u6wLS947y94r3Q3c/K28rPy8rd1NrVv8m017O84bvC4MHKxsbFs7vVyNC62ri63rm737q537jg39/Qz83s7Oy83rvA5L+94b3H2sbG2sbN28zC2cHJ28i9ybi40LLA5MB2FprZAAAANElEQVR42jXHtQGAQABFsfdxX4D9t6PC3U7SRYiPkHTCI8V/rY3Dnsx88G9kdN9bkLNC/gJaSwktEGNpZwAAAABJRU5ErkJggg" />
        </div> 
  <figcaption>Illustration by <a href="https://github.com/marcusolsson/gophers/">Marcus Olsson</a> (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)</figcaption>

</figure>

I was surprised that I couldn't find a simple explanation on sites like StackOverflow,
which is why I wrote down some notes myself so that others can refer to it in the future.

### Our example code

The initial version looked like this:

```go
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"io/ioutil"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	analyze("test.txt")
}

func analyze(file string) error {
	handle, err := os.Open(file)

	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	defer handle.Close()

	scanner := bufio.NewScanner(handle)
	for scanner.Scan() {
		// Do something with line
		_ = scanner.Text()
	}
	return nil
}
```

As you can see, we take a filename as input, and we open that file inside the `analyze` function to do something with its contents.

### Writing our first test for the code

A typical test harness for that code might look like this:

```go
package main

import "testing"

func Test_analyze(t *testing.T) {
	t.Run("Test something", func(t *testing.T) {
		if err := analyze("test.txt"); (err != nil) != false {
			t.Errorf("analyze() error = %v", err)
		}
	})
}
```

All fine and good?  

### Problems

This will work, but file I/O while running tests is not always the best idea.
For one, you could be running in a constrained environment, where you don't have access to the file.
We could use [temporary files](https://stackoverflow.com/a/20924657/270334) to avoid this.

But there might be problems with disk I/O, which makes for flaky tests and frustration.  
Another process could also modify the file during the test.
All these issues have nothing to do with your code.

Furthermore, it's not enough to just look at the test and see exactly what's going on. You also have to read the text file first.

A lot of people [suggest mocking](https://stackoverflow.com/a/37035375/270334) instead. 
There are quite a few powerful libraries like [spf13/afero](https://github.com/spf13/afero) for this purpose.
These packages will create temporary files in the background and clean up afterward.

In my opinion, mocking should be the last resort when it comes to testing. Before you mock, check that you use the right abstractions in your code.
Maybe implementing against an interface or using Dependency Injection helps decouple components?
More often than not, a clear separation of concerns is all you need.

### Refactoring to make testing easier

In my case above, we can easily avoid using mocks and temporary files by decoupling file I/O from the analysis.
We do so by refactoring our `analyze` function to call `doSomething`, which takes an [`io.Reader`](https://golang.org/pkg/io/#Reader).
(You could also use an array of strings for now.)

Our `main.go` now looks like this:

```go
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"io"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	analyze("test.txt")
}

func analyze(file string) error {
	handle, err := os.Open(file)

	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	defer handle.Close()
	return doSomething(handle)
}

func doSomething(handle io.Reader) error {
	scanner := bufio.NewScanner(handle)
	for scanner.Scan() {
		// Do something with line
		_ = scanner.Text()
	}
	return nil
}
```

Now we can test the actual analysis in isolation:

```go
package main

import (
	"strings"
	"testing"
)

func Test_analyze(t *testing.T) {
	t.Run("Test something", func(t *testing.T) {
		if err := doSomething(strings.NewReader("This is a test string")); (err != nil) != false {
			t.Errorf("analyze() error = %v", err)
		}
	})
}
```

We changed `analyze("test.txt")` to `doSomething(strings.NewReader("This is a test string"))`.
(Of course, we should also write a separate test for `analyze()`, but the focus is on decoupling the datasource-agnostic part here.)

### Result

By slightly refactoring our code, we gained the following advantages:

* *Simple testability*: No mocks or temporary files.
* *Separation of concerns*: Each function does exactly one thing.
* *Easier code re-use*: The `doSomething()` function will work with any `io.Reader` and can be called from other places. We can even move it to its own library if we want.

On Reddit, user [soapysops](https://www.reddit.com/user/soapysops) made an [important remark](https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/86f4gw/refactoring_go_code_to_avoid_file_io_in_unit_tests/dw4l2bq/):  
> In general, I prefer to not accept a file name in an API. A file name doesn't give users enough control. It doesn't let you use an unusual encoding, special file permissions, or a bytes.Buffer instead of an actual file, for example. Accepting a file name adds a huge dependency to the code: the file system, along with all of its associated OS specific stuff.
>
> So I probably would have eliminated the file name based API and only exposed one based on io.Reader. That way, you have complete code coverage, fast tests, and far fewer edge cases to worry about.

I totally agree with that sentiment.  
But often times you can't simply change the user-facing API easily, because the API might be public and might already have users. 
The refactoring above is just the first step towards better architecture. There is definitely a lot more you can do.
If that got you interested, also check out [justforfunc #29: dependency injection in a code review](https://youtu.be/ifBUfIb7kdo), which talks about the same topic.
