# Computer Terms History

All too often we use terminology without knowing the origin. The etymology of
computer terms can be fascinating and entertaining. This project tries to
preserve the surprising history of computing terms we use every day.

## Bikeshed

**Useless discussion about trivial issues **

The law has been applied to software development and other activities.The term bike-shed effect or bike-shedding was coined as a metaphor to illuminate the law of triviality; it was popularised in the Berkeley Software Distribution community by the Danish computer developer Poul-Henning Kamp in 1999[3] and has spread from there to the whole software industry.

The concept was first presented as a corollary of his broader "Parkinson's law" spoof of management. He dramatizes this "law of triviality" with the example of a committee's deliberations on an atomic reactor, contrasting it to deliberations on a bicycle shed. As he put it: "The time spent on any item of the agenda will be in inverse proportion to the sum of money involved." A reactor is so vastly expensive and complicated that an average person cannot understand it, so one assumes that those who work on it understand it. On the other hand, everyone can visualize a cheap, simple bicycle shed, so planning one can result in endless discussions because everyone involved wants to add a touch and show personal contribution.

Sources:
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_triviality
* (History behind the original bikeshed email on the FreeBSD mailing list)[http://phk.freebsd.dk/sagas/bikeshed.html]


## Boilerplate

**A chunk of code that is copied over and over again with little or no changes made to it in the process.**

"Boiler plate" originally referred to the rolled steel used to make water boilers but is used in the media to refer to hackneyed or unoriginal writing. The term refers to the metal printing plates of pre-prepared text such as advertisements or syndicated columns that were distributed to small, local newspapers. These printing plates came to be known as 'boilerplates' by analogy. One large supplier to newspapers of this kind of boilerplate was the Western Newspaper Union, which supplied "ready-to-print stories [which] contained national or international news" to papers with smaller geographic footprints, which could include advertisements pre-printed next to the conventional content.

Sources:

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boilerplate_text
* https://stackoverflow.com/a/3997441/270334

## Bug

** A defect in a piece of code or hardware**

One of the most well-known ones. Contrary to popular belief it predates the bug found by Grace Hopper in the Mark II computer.

The term "bug" to describe defects has been a part of engineering jargon since the 1870s and predates electronic computers and computer software; it may have originally been used in hardware engineering to describe mechanical malfunctions.

Sources: 

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_bug#Etymology


## Firmware

**A class of computer software that provides the low-level control for the device's specific hardware**

Ascher Opler coined the term "firmware" in a 1967 Datamation article. As originally used, firmware contrasted with hardware (the CPU itself) and software (normal instructions executing on a CPU). It existed on the boundary between hardware and software; thus the name "firmware". 

Sources:

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Firmware

## Foo & Bar

**When a programmer quickly needs a placeholder variable name, sometimes the terms 
"foo" and "bar" are used.

There's a much longer list on
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_computer_term_etymologies)



## Patch

Bugs are fixed with patches.

## Radio Button

https://twitter.com/themattcoady/status/988819505534009344

## i18n

Number of letters between the i and the n. Same for kubernetes (k8s) and
localization (l10n)


### Mac’s Command ⌘ And Option ⌥ Symbols

The ⌘ symbol came into the Macintosh project at a late stage. The development
team originally went for their old Apple key, but Steve Jobs found it
frustrating when "apples" filled up the Mac's menus next to the key commands,
because he felt that this was an over-use of the company logo.[3] He then opted
for a different key symbol. With only a few days left before deadline, the
team's bitmap artist Susan Kare started researching for the Apple logo's
successor. She was browsing through a symbol dictionary when she came across the
cloverleaf-like symbol, commonly used in Nordic countries as an indicator of
cultural locations and places of interest[2][6] (it is the official road sign
for tourist attraction in Denmark, Finland,[7] Iceland,[8] Norway,[9] and
Sweden,[10] and the computer key has often been called Fornminne — ancient
monument — by Swedish Mac users[11] and Seværdighedstegn by Danish users). When
she showed it to the rest of the team, everyone liked it, and so it became the
symbol of the 1984 Macintosh command key.[12][6] Susan Kare states that it has
since been told to her that the symbol had been picked for its Scandinavian
usage due to its resembling the shape of a square castle with round corner
towers as seen from above looking down, notably Borgholm Castle.[6]

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_key

https://www.cultofmac.com/181495/what-are-the-macs-command-%E2%8C%98-and-option-%E2%8C%A5-symbols-supposed-to-represent/

## Ship it

## Uppercase and lowercase


# Similar Projects

* (awesome-computer-history)[https://github.com/watson/awesome-computer-history]